# Conclusion

In my graduate work, I developed computational approaches to uncover the dynamics of viral evolution from high-throughput datasets. In **Chapter 1**, I used a spatially resolved deep sequencing dataset to characterize the selective pressures acting in a chronic Measles infection of the brain. In **Chapter 2**, I used deep sequencing data from individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 to determine if transmission imposes a narrow bottleneck on viral diversity in a superspreading event. Finally, in **Chapter 3**, I built an interactive tool for analyzing deep mutational scanning data and other mutation-based datasets in the context of a 3D protein structure. *In this chapter, I'll discuss the main insights from each of these studies and talk about potential avenues for future research.*

## How important is cooperation in viral pathology?

In **Chapter 1** I explored the within-host evolutionary dynamics of a Measles infection of the brain. In rare cases, Measles, which ordinarily causes an acute self-limiting infection, can progress into a chronic infection of the brain known as Subacute Sclerosing Panenchephalitis (SSPE) [@baczkoClonalExpansionHypermutated1993]. There are many mysteries surrounding the mechanisms that allow Measles to persist in the brain years after an initial infection including how Measles enters the brain, remains undetected by the immune system, and spreads in the absence of its host receptors.

When we analyzed RNA from spatially distributed samples collected from the brain of a patient who succumbed to SSPE, we identified two distinct genotypes that bore the mutational hallmarks of brain adaptation. These two subpopulations were found throughout the brain at varying frequencies. However, microscopy revealed that most cells were infected with viruses from *both* genotypes, suggesting the possibility of cooperation. Using a computational approach that we developed to stitch individual mutations into longer haplotypes, we characterized the diversification and phylogenetic relationship among viruses from each genotype. Although not definitive, our phylogenetic analysis provided evidence that these two genotypes originated in the Frontal Cortex. Additionally, during diversification, viruses from both genotypes acquired mutations in the cytoplasmic tail of the Fusion (F) protein that fluctuated in frequency throughout the brain. We believe that the recurrent gain or loss of these fusion-modulating mutations could be the result of frequency-dependent selection and cooperative evolution.

Cooperation among viral variants can lead to emergent phenotypes and increased fitness [@sanjuanCollectiveInfectiousUnits2017]. For example, a study from our lab found that two influenza variants that differ by a single amino acid in the neuraminidase protein grow better together than apart when passaged in cell culture [@xueCooperationDistinctViral2016]. The apparent synergy between these variants is the result of one variant increasing the proficiency of cell entry, while the other variant increases the proficiency of cell exit. Interestingly, cooperation between viral variants has also been observed in Measles virus passaged in cell culture. While studying the mechanisms of Measles virus entry, Shirogane et. al. discovered that, together, wildtype and mutant F proteins were able to mediate cell-to-cell fusion in the absence of a normally functioning hemagglutinin (H) protein *despite* neither variant being able to do so alone [@shiroganeCooperationDifferentRNA2012]. The proposed mechanism for this cooperation is a balance between the stability and fusion activity of the F protein. In both cases, the virus is propagating as a collection of viral genomes rather than independent virions. This collection of viral genomes is known as *collective infection units*.

Despite the theoretical implications of *collective infection units* in the pathology of viral infections, this phenomenon has mainly been studied *in vitro*. However, we suspect that cooperation among viral variants may give Measles a selective advantage in the brain. It's been shown that Measles can spread *en bloc* between cells in the brain, whereby multiple genomes are transmitted together across neuronal synapses [@altan-bonnetExtracellularVesiclesVehicles2019]. Furthermore, in a model of SSPE, it's been shown that cooperation among F proteins with varying levels of fusion competence can lead to a non-additive increase in fusion activity [@shiroganeCollectiveFusionActivity2023]. Given that increased fusion activity seems to be a crucial aspect of Measles adaptation to the brain, we hypothesize that the distinct genotypes we observed may cooperate to achieve an optimal fusion activity. However, the selective advantage of co-infection with these distinct genotypes needs to be demonstrated *in vitro*. An important next step will be to test if and how the co-infection of the viral variants we identified is beneficial in an experimental model of SSPE.

## Why does transmission impose such a narrow bottleneck?

In **Chapter 2** I determined that transmission imposes a narrow bottleneck on viral diversity in a SARS-CoV-2 superspreading event. Studies of SARS-CoV-2 transmission in hospital and household settings have demonstrated that the transmission bottleneck for SARS-CoV-2 is narrow; on the order of 1 to 15 founding virions [@braunAcuteSARSCoV2Infections2021; @lythgoeSARSCoV2WithinhostDiversity2021; @popaGenomicEpidemiologySuperspreading2020; @wangPopulationBottlenecksIntrahost2021; @sanTransmissionDynamicsSARSCoV22021; @bendallRapidTransmissionTight2023]. However, our study was the first to explore the dynamics of shared viral diversity in a setting that involved close contact, long-term exposure, and a high attack rate - a ‘super spreading event.’ Despite these factors, we found that viral diversity was limited and not shared between individuals in the transmission event, suggesting a narrow bottleneck. This narrow bottleneck purges the genetic diversity that accumulates during an infection and the selective forces that act on that diversity. Unless within-host selection is strong enough to fix a beneficial variant, there is a high likelihood that a variant will not transmit. However, the question remains; why does transmission impose such a narrow bottleneck on viral diversity?

Several stages of transmission likely reduce the size and diversity of the viral population. To successfully initiate an infection, viral variants must survive these population bottlenecks in both the *donor* and *recipient* hosts. In the donor, the virus occupies an environment consisting of heterogeneous and spatially distributed cells. This complex spatial structure leads to the compartmentalization of the viral population within a host [@amatoInfluenzaVirusUndergoes2022; @gallagherCausesConsequencesSpatial2018]. As a result, the viruses that are ultimately expelled from the donor may only represent a tiny fraction of the total viral diversity in the host. Following expulsion, these virions must survive a series of population bottlenecks in the recipient, including mucus barriers and mucosal immunity. The virions that remain will then need to infect cells with the correct host receptors and a favorable intracellular environment. Finally, *in vitro* studies of viral progeny production have demonstrated that only a small fraction of infected cells produce the majority of infectious viral progeny [@bacsikInfluenzaVirusTranscription2023]. Although each of these factors alone could result in a narrow transmission bottleneck, a combination of these factors is likely to blame.

The exact contributions of each stage of transmission to a narrow population bottleneck remain elusive. Additionally, how aspects like preexisting immunity in the recipient, the nature of the contact between donor and recipient, and the duration of infection in the donor influence the bottleneck, and if they can influence it all, is still poorly understood. Attempts have been made to mathematically model the transmission bottleneck while taking these factors into account [@morrisAsynchronyVirusDiversity2020]. However, future research employing animal models will be necessary to fully understand how each aspect of transmission affects the viral population. For instance, in some of our unpublished work, we used a hamster model of SARS-CoV-2 infection to test how the droplet size expelled by the donor host influences the stringency of the transmission bottleneck. Although we found a modest correlation between larger droplet sizes and looser bottlenecks, the power of the analysis was significantly limited by the lack of viral diversity in the donor hamsters. Future investigations that use animal models in conjunction with diverse barcoded virus libraries might provide deeper insights into how different facets of transmission affect the bottleneck size. Nevertheless, alternative approaches will likely be necessary to fully comprehend the reasons behind the remarkably narrow nature of the transmission bottleneck for RNA viruses.

## What is the future of software in deep mutational scanning?

In **Chapter 3** I built a web-based tool to analyze and share deep mutational scanning data in the context of an interactive protein structure. Understanding how mutations impact a protein's function is an important aspect of many biological questions. Deep-mutational scanning (DMS) has greatly increased the number of these mutation-function datasets. Although this mutation-based data is best understood in the context of a protein’s 3D structure, the methods previously used to accomplish this are cumbersome and limited in scope. To address this, I built `dms-viz` to be customizable, comprehensive, and handle a wide diversity of experimental designs. `dms-viz` allows researchers to create an interactive dashboard for each mutation-based dataset that can easily be shared with others through stable URL links. Ultimately, `dms-viz` addresses the inherent complexity of analyzing large mutation-based datasets by providing a standardized and user-friendly interface.

Although `dms-viz` significantly decreases the complexity of analyzing large mutation-based datasets, it primarily serves those with a thorough understanding of their DMS experiment. This is a limitation considering that a broad audience could benefit from access to DMS datasets but may lack the necessary expertise to analyze these datasets themselves. For instance, choosing relevant protein structures and effectively filtering out noisy data are necessary tasks in creating an interpretable visualization that requires the user to have significant experimental knowledge. These details pose a challenge for those who are interested in using the data from DMS experiments but lack the background to interpret them independently.

To enhance the accessibility and usability of DMS data, a future objective is to develop a centralized, curated platform akin to the Nextstrain [@hadfieldNextstrainRealtimeTracking2018]. This platform would not only facilitate the exploration and visualization of DMS data but also provide a repository of curated analyses. Nextstrain exemplifies this approach by offering tools for phylogenetic analysis and visualization while also maintaining a collection of curated vignettes. These vignettes are invaluable for researchers who require phylogenetic insights but may not possess the skills for in-depth data analysis. A similar system for DMS data would be incredibly beneficial. Such a platform could feature a user-friendly landing page, offering easy access to curated DMS datasets and visualizations, thus making this complex data comprehensible and accessible even for those without extensive expertise in the field.
